
# Individual heterogeneity in development time alter the optimal expectation of classic life-history trade offs.

Karthik Ram and Perry de Valpine.

Environmental Science, Policy & Management. University of California, Berkeley. Berkeley, CA 94720

karthik.ram@berkeley.edu

-------------------------------

Species are inevitably constrained by selection pressures from various sources resulting in tradeoffs between processes such as growth, survival and reproduction [@Grime1977]. Since life history traits are often dependent on the same resource, maximizing any one trait will come at the expense of another resulting in a trade off.  When selection force optimize such tradeoffs, it can strongly influence the fitness outcome [@Roff1992; @Stearns1992]. Trade offs between such vital rates allow organisms, especially ones with complex life histories, to choose an optimal strategy that maximizes their reproductive fitness under a range of environmental conditions [@Stearns1992; @Roff1992]. From its origins with very simple models, life history theory has been extended to consider increasingly realistic assumptions.  These include environmental stochasticity, individual behavior, density-dependence, and frequency-dependence, among other processes.  Some of these considerations can strongly change the optimal life history strategy, and the question remains as to what other factors are essential for obtaining realistic predictions of life history traits [@Calvo1990]. 

Recent syntheses have once again highlighted importance of individual heterogeneity for population processes [@Bolnick2003; @Bolnick2011]. In the context of population ecology, individual heterogeneity in demographic traits can impact population growth rate, extinction risk [@FOX2006], species interactions, and nonlinear population dynamics [@Gonzalez-suarez2011; @Bolnick2003].  Finding an appropriate way to incorporate variation among individuals has always been a problem in the analysis of tradeoffs [@Stearns1992].  Ignoring such variation can lead to one drawing incorrect conclusions from tradeoff analysis [@Nichols1994; @Cam2009].  While numerous studies over the last six decades have focused on the ecological and evolutionary implications of life history trade offs, more recent efforts have cast some of these classic trade offs under the lens of individual heterogeneity [@Bonenfant2003; @Weladji2008].   In the case of ungulates, the addition of individual heterogeneity alters the optimal trade off between current and future reproduction in a variety of ungulates [@Weldaji2008; @Hamel2009].   Population growth rate is equivalent to the fitness of a life history strategy under density-independence or if density-dependence impacts all individuals.  Therefore, if the effect of individual variation on population growth rate is different for different life history strategies, then individual variation could alter the outcome of life history evolution. Therefore, understanding the consequences of individual heterogeneity on population processes has remained a central question in population ecology [@Wilson2010]

If an organism is able to maximize several key life history traits, such as growth, survival and reproduction, it can maximize its lifetime reproductive success [@Abrams1996].  Growth rate is an important vital rate since it is one of the few life history variables that has the strongest influence on fitness [@Hutchings2006]. However,  an increased juvenile growth rate often comes as the cost of higher mortality, primarily from ecological sources such as increased predation risk [@Bernays1997] but also due to developmental anomalies associated with rapid growth and the associated physiological costs [@Werner1993; @Gotthard2001; @Abrams1996; @Anholt1988]. Also since juvenile growth strongly influences adult size and  Here we consider some of the evolutionary dimensions of juvenile growth. Particularly, how the optimial trade off between juvenile growth and survival might be influenced by incorporating developmental variability and correlation between stages.  

An additional but less explored question is how correlations among heterogeneous life history traits could impact life history evolution. In addition to variation in development times, if such rates are maintained across stages, then individuals maturing quickly through one stage are likely to mature quickly through subsequent life stages as well. Despite the recognition of individual heterogeneity on population dynamics, the added complexity of correlation has been harder to understand due to the complexities of model implementation [@Pfister2003], especially with a matrix modeling approach [@Caswell2001]. Although these combined dynamics can be incorporated in integral projection models,  [@Zuidema2009] are notable in their implementation as a multi-stage matrix model, where  age and size classifications are jointly used to distingish fast from slow growers. While such empirical work suggests a large contribution of fast growing individuals to overall population dynamics, the influence of such correlated development rates on trade offs remain unexplored.

Since stage is a much better predictor for individual quality than age [@Knight2004], there is a need for a more general framework for incorporating individual heterogeneity in stage structured populations [@Barfield2011]. Several recent models have extended stage-structured matrix models to incorporate individual heterogeneity in development.  The method described in [@deValpine2009] allows specification of a distribution for the time spent in each stage, and for the possibility of these distributions to be correlated.  Time spent in the final stage corresponds to adult longevity.  In this framework, an exponential time in a stage corresponds (when time is discretized) to the geometric distribution of a matrix model.  At the other extreme, a development time distribution with very small variance corresponds to a delay-differential equation model.  Thus our approach allows us to consider the full spectrum between matrix models and delay-differential equation models. Several other approaches also exist along the same lines.  One of those ways by which variable development time can be included in a model is by using the "linear chain trick" [@MacDonald1978] which provides a way to reformulate integro differential equations as ODEs wherein each stage is broken into a series of smaller stages connected by constant flow rates [@deValpine2009]. However, this approach is still not suitable enough to incorporate flexible assumptions [@deValpine2009]. [@Caswell2001] also presents two extensions to incorporate realistic development times, one for populations at stable stage distribution and another, a negative binomial stage model for when they more general mean and variance in development times. This approach was further extended by [@Birt2009], who propose a discretized version of phase-type models building upon the framework proposed by [@Caswell2001]. Although the framework described by [@Birt2009] captures the inherent variability in development time, the implementation requires highly specific assumptions regarding the distribution and variance in development time. However, the complexity of such an approach hiders widespread implementation. These new methods and implementation techniques provide an easy-way to incorporate variable development into matrix models and revisit ecological theory. 

 Here we show that individual stochasticity in development time, with realistic developmental delays, as well as correlations between development time and adult longevity, can have a significant effect on the optimal of development rate under tradeoffs with survival or reproduction.  Variation in development time is very common, yet is rarely modeled realistically. Despite its popularity, matrix population models fail to incorporate an adequate level biological realism that characteize most populations in nature.  Matrix models treat every individual as having a constant rate of maturing in each time step, and such models have been used to examine optimal maturation rate.  While such models can be derived as transition rates at the stable stage distribution resulting from a more realistic development process [@Caswell2011], they are often taken literally as the starting point for considering population dynamics and evolution [@Barfield2011].  Taken literally, a matrix model with maturation rate m says there is a geometric distribution of the development time (time until maturation) with mean `1/m`, which is not very realistic. On the other hand, delay-differential equation models include a realistic developmental delay, but in their simplest form they omit any variation in development time.  Thus, common life history models of development rate are unrealistic for purposes of life history theory.

In this paper, we investigate how incorporating additional complexity into classic tradeoff analyses, such as more realistic assumptions about time spent in a stage, and correlation between stages,  affects the optimum of key life history tradeoffs. In any tradeoff analysis, the shape of the curve is critical in determining which life history strategy would be favored [@Schaffer1975]. Therefore, models incorporating realistic distributions of time spent will help determine the right strategy. Here, we use the stochastic development model of [@deValpine2009] to ask how different distributions of development time and correlations between development time and adult longevity impact life history evolution. We take a simple optimization approach, and consider tradeoffs between development rate and juvenile survival and between development rate and adult fecundity. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict our efforts to a two-stage model (juveniles and adults) with a density-independent case, although our analyses could easily be extended to more complex scenarios. We analyze the outcome of models spanning a range of compelxity, from the simple matrix case  to incorporating variation in development time within stages to correlation between stages. We then compare how the optimal trade off strategy shifts as a result of these new assumptions.





## Literature Cited
